---
layout: post
title:  "Destiny and Tangibility"
date:   2014-09-22 16:16:01 -0600
categories: video-games gaming desting
promo-image: "assets/images/post-images/destiny.jpg"
---
There have been a lot of criticisms levelled towards
[Destiny](http://www.destinythegame.com/) ever since its release: it’s lack of
story, its unfair loot system and obvious DLC holes. These are all valid points
but I think there is a more pervasive problem with Destiny which actually links
most of these flaws together and generally makes the whole game worse.

Simply put: Destiny doesn’t feel real. It is a series of, very beautiful,
unconnected experiences that never weave together into a cohesive experience or
world.

### Landing Gear
Let me ask you a question, how do you get out of your ship? Do you land? If so,
where did you land your ship? The place where you spawn on the planets doesn’t
feel like you’ve just come from your spaceship because there is no hint that you
have. You simply appear randomly on the ground, strangely in the same spot every
time. If we just saw your ship swoop down and see you jump out and land all cool
like it would connect it, Mass Effect did this very well showing the Mako being
dropped on explorable planets.

<span class="figcaption_hack">[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ilQGSfmCyO0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ilQGSfmCyO0)</span>

Imagine though if instead of appearing inexplicably in the same place that you
select from the planet map where abouts you’re going to land, perhaps near your
objective, perhaps near your friend who you see is currently exploring, or right
next to a public event that desperately needs more help. Then either a Mass
Effect drop animation or even a [Planetside 2 style drop pod
sequence](http://youtu.be/MpklOrP5Gdc?t=45s) would look fantastic and connect
the experience of sitting in your ship and running around on the ground.

### Grounding Yourself

The other big oversight on Bungie’s part, which would have been depressingly
easy to implement, was the lack of maps in the game. Maps are so important. They
provide context and scale. They are easy to interpret and beautiful to look at.
Without them we are lost. And in Destiny I felt lost a lot. Navigation was just
constantly running towards the white diamond marker showing me mission waypoint,
never did I think about the planets in real way. I navigated by “Ok I’ll head
towards the diamond marker” instead of “Oh the mission at The Divide I’ll head
in that direction”. The difference is subtle but the latter regards the
environment and world as a real place, and in a supposedly open-world aspiring
game it is vital. Imagine playing Skyrim *without* the map.

What I find bizarre is that Bungie did make the maps, they act as the mission
select screen, but because we never interact with the maps in game, because we
never see our cursor on it telling us where we are we never get a sense of scale
or place.

### Stellar Cartography
Similarly the perspective of the planet select screen never changes. For example
if I’m currently at Mars then the Tower is still in the centre. I understand
that in terms of hierarchy the Tower and Traveller are most important so from a
symbolic perspective putting them in the centre makes sense but it breaks the
suspension of disbelief slightly. I become very aware that this is a video game,
that this spaceship it a glorified menu select screen and I’m not actually
moving anywhere.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Mass Effect 2 Solar System Map</span>

If they had modelled the planet select screen after say, the solar system, it
would have immediately made it feel more real. An example of this done extremely
well is in Mass Effect 2. In Mass Effect 1 you simply selected a planet to land
on which wasn’t brilliant because you didn’t have a persepective of where your
ship currently was in relation to where you were going. So in Mass Effect 2
Bioware made you have to move your ship around the map. Some may have found it
gimmicky but it immediately told the player where they were and offered context
and scale about how far things were in the game.

### Object Permanence
Many people have opinions on the fairness of the Destiny’s Loot system but I
think there is equal trouble in terms of how the loot is delivered. There is a
reason why in the MMO community and in general video game culture we refer to
enemies *dropping* loot. It’s because they *drop* the loot, physically. Destiny
has done away with this and has given us a slot machine style random give at the
end of a Strike mission. This entirely removes the reward of gaining a new item
from the activity of killing a boss or completing a mission. Making it more
difficult to feel happy and rewarded from killing the boss. With grind heavy
fairs like destiny, reward feedback is vital. As soo as the boredom of the grind
outways the joy of the reward the player loses interest. You want the feedback
loop to be as short as possible.

Similarly, once you have these items in your inventory you cant move them at
all. You can’t trade them with another player and you can’t drop them in the
world. They are icons with no physical presence in the world of Destiny

<span class="figcaption_hack">Borderlands Loot</span>

A game that deals with items and reward sublimely is one that Destiny has oft
been compared to: Borderlands. When you defeat a boss in borlerlands loot spews
forth from the enemy with pillars of colorful light like a font of gunpowder
glory. It looks exciting and fun and happens the immediate moment that last
bullet is fired into the boss.

### The Good Stuff
The most pervading quality of Destiny is inconsistency. This is seen in the
mission design, the on-off approach to story and the weapons. This is also true
with its tangibility. One of the best things the game does comes into play in
multiplayer and when you’re in a Fireteam. When you have a couple of people in
your fireteam their ships join yours in the loading screen, making you feel like
your really a crew of people.

Similarly when jumping over to multiplayer your teams ships join you in the jump
to the map and you get a cool avengers-esque tableau of you all looking cool in
your gear.

These are great flourishes that help to tie the world together, but by being the
only notable interesting examples in an otherwise fractured experience they only
serve to highlight whats missing.

Ultimately, Bungie promised so much about the feel of Destiny and delivered so
little. They promised exploration, but gave us no map. They promised showing off
loot to your friends, but offered no mechanics for us to do so. So I guess what
I’m saying is Bungie is the new Peter Molyneux.